{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2513
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Bold;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red54\green54\blue54;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\csgenericrgb\c21176\c21176\c21176;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs72 \cf2 Methods
\fs36 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 Network Parameter Outlier (NPO)
\fs28 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\fs32 \cf2 The NPO algorithm consists of two stages (a \'93local\'94 and a \'93global\'94 stage), each consisting of several steps. The first, \'93local\'94 stage processes data In a sliding window: 1.1) Apply spectral filtering to the data, 1.2) Detect all local peaks, regardless of polarity, 1.3) Construct a network where vertices represent each peak and edges represent the correlation coefficient between peaks, keeping only those edges whose coefficient magnitude is greater than a user-defined threshold. 1.4) Identify \'93cliques\'94 of similar vertices using a network clustering algorithm (\'91cluster_louvain\'92 in R, [Blondel et al., 2008]) and persist these clique memberships to a database. The second, \'93global\'94 stage can be performed either online (when no further detections are found in the sliding window for a given clique) or offline for all cliques once the recording is finished. 2.1) For each clique, reconstruct the complete network for the entire recording duration (called the \'93global network\'94). 2.2) Compute network properties. Cliques whose properties differ from that of the most common detections (i.e., "noise") are designated as \'93signal\'94. 2.3) Combine cliques to form clusters, either by collecting all cliques labeled as \'93signal\'94 into one cluster, or by using standard clustering techniques on average clique parameters (e.g., as described below, we used Mahalanobis distances on clique average waveforms).\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \'93CC\'94 is a metric between two nodes\
\'93community\'94 is a local estimate\
\'93clusterid\'94 is a global designation\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
This algorithm has three, free parameters based on expected physiological properties of events: 1) spectral frequencies, 2) sliding window duration, 3) cross-correlation threshold.\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 Rodent Data - MSO Model\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs32 \cf2 Rats were treated with Methionine Sulfoximide (MSO), as described previously (XXXX). 
\f0\b\fs48 \
\
Human Data - ICU\

\f1\b0\fs32 Intracranial EEG were obtained from patients undergoing treatment for medically refractive epilepsy at Yale Hospital, as described previously (XXXX). Patients were implanted with intracranial grid and depth electrodes, along with Behnke-Fried electrodes. Continuous recordings were obtained at 32 kHz. 
\f0\b\fs48 \
\
Human Data - Ambulatory
\fs28 \
\

\f1\b0\fs32 Ambulatory, intracranial EEG were obtained from patients over multiple months, as described previously (Cook et al., XXXX).
\fs22 \
 }